
# Revisiting Probability Distributions

## Overview

In this lab you will:

1. Revise probability concepts that we discussed in Level 1
2. Calculate probabilities 
3. Create probability distributions
4. Make estimations from probability distributions.

Probability is to some degree the cornerstone of any Psychological theory that is based on quantitative analysis. We establish an outcome (e.g. a difference between two events), then establish the probability of that outcome, before finally deciding if that probability is meaningful or not. You will have already seen this in your lectures and in the journal articles that you are reading. We will try to help you gain a deeper understanding of probability through the course of the next few labs and in how we use it to make an inference about a population. 

We will start by looking at some of the general ideas behind probability. We won't be using a lot of Psychology data or concepts here as it can be easier to understand in very concrete examples but be sure to try things out, ask questions, and think about how it might relate to Psychology examples. This preclass is a bit of a read so take your time and try to understand it fully.

There are no cheatsheets for this lab as we will not be using a specific package. However you can make full use of the R help function (e.g. `?sample`) when you are not clear on what a function does. Also, do not be shy to do what we do and run a Google Search for finding out more about some of the stats concepts covered here. There are loads of videos and help pages out there with clear examples to explain difficult concepts. 


<div class='solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Samples, Populations and Inference</button>

<div class="info">
<p>The population is the whole group that you want to know something about - everyone or everything in that group. The sample is the part of the population that you are testing. The sample is always smaller than the population as it is unlikely that you would ever be able to test everyone in a population, but the sample should be representative of the population based on random sampling. This means that even though you are not using the whole population, the sample you are using represents the whole population because you randomly sampled people into it. If this is true, that the sample is representative of the population, then testing on the sample allows you to make some inference about the population; you infer a characteristic of the population from testing on the sample.</p>
</div>

</div>


### Discrete or Continuous Datasets

This is a short tutorial with just a couple of quick recap questions on how the **level of measurement** can alter the way you tackle probability - i.e. whether the data is discrete or continuous.

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--green);">Quickfire Questions</span>

**Discrete** data can only take integer values (whole numbers). For example, the number of  participants in an experiment would be discrete - we can't have half a participant! Discrete variables can also be further broken down into **nominal/categorical** and **ordinal** variables. 
<br>
Fill in the blanks in the below sentences using the words: ordinal, nominal, categorical.

* <input class='solveme nospaces ignorecase' size='8' data-answer='["categorical"]'/> data is based on a set of categories but the ordering doesn't matter (e.g. left or right handed). This is sometimes referred to as <input class='solveme nospaces ignorecase' size='8' data-answer='["nominal"]'/> data. For example, you could separate participants according to left or right handedness or by education level.

* <input class='solveme nospaces ignorecase' size='8' data-answer='["ordinal"]'/> data is a set of ordered categories; you know which is the top/best and which is the worst/lowest, but not the difference between categories. For example, you could ask participants to rate the attractiveness of different faces based on a 5-item Likert scale (very unattractive, unattractive, neutral, attractive, very attractive).   

**Continuous** data on the other hand can take any value. For example, we can measure age on a continuous scale (e.g. we can have an age of 26.55 years), also reaction time or the distance you travel to university every day. 

Fill in the blanks in the below sentences using the two remaining levels of measurement not offered above

* Continuous data can be broken into <input class='solveme nospaces ignorecase' size='10' data-answer='["interval","ratio"]'/> or <input class='solveme nospaces ignorecase' size='10' data-answer='["interval","ratio"]'/> data - more of this another time.

When you read journal articles or when you are working with data in the lab, it is really good practice to take a minute or two to figure out the type of variables you are reading about and/or working with. 


<div class='solution'><button>Explain This - I don't get these answers</button>

<div class="info">
<p>The four level of measurements are nominal (also called categorical), ordinal, interval and ratio. Discrete data only uses categories or whole numbers and is therefore either nominal or ordinal data. Continuous data can take any value, e.g. 9.00 or 9.999999999, and so is either interval or ratio data.</p>
</div>

</div>

<br>

You should have a good understanding of discrete vs continuous data. This will help you complete the activities of this chapter and in your understanding of probability and inference. 
