
# NHST and One-Sample t-tests

## Overview

In the previous labs, we have talked a lot about probability, comparing average values across groups, and the inference from a sample to a population. In effect, this is the essence of a lot of quantitative research. You  collect a sample, calculate a summary statistic about that sample, and use probability to establish the likelihood of that statistic occurring given certain situations. To demonstrate this further, and to start introducing commonly used statistical tests, we will look at data related to a recent Posner experiment by <a href = "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005796708002738" target = "_blank">Woods et al (2009)</a>.

We will use part of the information shown in the paper to explore hypothesis testing. Through the lab 6 activities you will learn about:

1. Testing a hypothesis through null hypothesis significance testing (NHST)
2. Binomial tests, as well as one-sample and independent t-tests
3. Posner paradigms and attention (preclass), and the recency effect (inclass).


<div class='solution'><button>Portfolio Point - Additional background on The Posner Paradigm</button>

<div class="info">
<p>You don’t need this for the actual lab but it might help it make more sense.</p>
<p>The Posner paradigm (Posner, 1980), or the Posner Cueing task, is an attentional shift task, often used in a variety of fields to test spatial attention and how this is impacted by disorders or injury. It works by having participants look at a fixation cross in the center of a screen. To either side is an empty box. After a short delay, a cue (e.g. an arrow, an asterisk, or some other attention grabbing image) appears in one of the boxes (e.g. the box to the left of the fixation). This stays on screen for a few hundred milliseconds and is then replaced by a second image called the target (e.g. a different shape or image). Participants then have to respond left or right depending on which side of the fixation the target appeared. The DV is the time taken to respond to the target appearing. The key thing is that most of the time the target will appear on the same side as the cue - the cue facilitates the target - and so participants will be quicker to respond. These are called valid trials. However, on some occasions the target will appear on the other side from the cue - e.g. the cue is on the left but the target appears on the right - and these are called invalid trials; participants will be slower to respond here as the cue misleads the participant. From that, you should be starting to get an idea of how a Posner paradigm can help to measure attention and how it can help determine if people have issues in shifting attention (particularly from the invalid trials).</p>
<p><a href="https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00335558008248231" target = "_blank">Posner, M. (1980) Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 32(1), 3-25</a></p>
</div>

</div>

