
# Introduction to GLM: One-factor ANOVA

## Overview

A key way that we attempt to learn from data is to build a **statistical model** that captures relationships among variables. In this chapter we will introduce you to the General Linear Model (GLM) and you will read about this approach in the Miller and Haden (2013) textbook (Chapters 1-3) as part of the PreClass. This is a common approach in statistics in Psychology and it encapsulates a range of common analytical techniques that you are already familiar with and will become even more familiar with throughout this book as we will spend some of the next few lessons looking at the GLM and reading about it. The GLM covers all the t-tests and correlations you have looked at, and the ANOVA and regression we are going to come on to. Basically, the General Linear Model (GLM) is the foundation of a lot of that statistical tests we use and that is what we will introduce it here and build on it as we progress through Psychology. And, one of the best ways to learn about linear models is to do things "by hand" on a simulated dataset.  

You will also notice a slight change in the assignments for the next few chapters in that you are required to do a little more computation than before. Keep in mind though that all the skills you need will of course be shown to you or you already have them. The previous chapters have been aimed at developing your general practical data skills and now we want to develop your understanding of the analysis and data you are working with, in the framework of the GLM, by working through the models by hand before running the functions. We did a little of this approach already with the t-test in Chapter 6 and 7. This time we will focus on looking at the General Linear Model (GLM) as this one modelling approach covers a number of different analyses, including t-tests as we mentioend. 

As such, the goals of this chapter are:

- to recap and practice entering data into a tibble (tidyverse data frame - as introduced Chapter 5);
- to learn how to estimate model parameters from a dataset;
- to learn how to derive/generate a **decomposition matrix** that expresses each observation/participant as a linear sum of model components and error.

These terms will become more familiar to you over the following chapters and from reading Miller and Haden, but remember to make notes for yourself to help your solidify your learnin and, as always, ask as many questions as you like!
