
## PreClass Activity

The PreClass Activity for this Chapter is just reading. It is quite a bit of reading but don't worry if you don't understand it all first time round. The best way to look at it will be to read through as prep, get the gist, then use it to support the activities and re-read to consolidate knowledge for the assessment.

### Read

**Chapters**

* As preparation for the inclass activities, please read chapters 1 to 3 of <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B1fyuTuvj3YoaFdUR3FZaXNuNXc/view" target = "_blank">Miller and Haden (2013)</a>. In this chapter's activities we will be working up to and including the concept of Sums of Squares which is around Section 3.4 of Miller and Haden (2013).

When reading this chapter it might help to remember that:

* Factor is another name for Variable
* Level is another name for Condition
* E.g. a between-subjects experiment with one independent variable (sleep quality) and two conditions (Good vs Poor) can be said to have one factor with two levels. 

The key terms we want you to be becoming familiar with from these chapters, though perhaps you don't quite fully understand them, are:

* **ANOVA** - short for Analysis of Variance. A statistical test used to compare the spread of the variance across two or more conditions and/or two or more factors. 
* **estimation equations** - formulas (or equations) that we use to determine our best guess (estimates) at parameters (values) of a population of interest from our sample parameters (values)
* **decomposition matrices** - a table (matrix) that breaks down information into individual components. In this instance, the decomposition matrix breaks down how each individual observation/participant is fitted into the estimation equations.
* **sums of squares** - an estimate of the total spread of the data around a parameter (such as the mean). We have seen these before in lectures as the top part of the variance equation: 

$$\sum(x - \bar{x})^2$$

The activities we will look at next will help you understand these terms better. In short, we will show you how to take data from a simulated experiment and apply the estimation equations to create a decomposition matrix summarising this data. This decomposition matrix will show how each participant and condition is fitted to the equations. From that matrix we will calculate the relevant sums of squares for each condition, which we will then use in our ANOVA calculation to determine if there is a significant difference between conditions. It is going to be a lot more fun than it sounds!

<span style="font-size: 22px; font-weight: bold; color: var(--blue);">Job Done - Activity Complete!</span>
